refactor(ccache): track invocationID/parentID in StorageHelper (#272)
bitrise-io/bitrise-build-cache-cli: docs/ccache.md

# ccache: Commands, Public API, and Internals

## Overview

ccache integration enables C++ build caching via a local IPC proxy server. The proxy intercepts ccache secondary-storage requests and forwards them to the Bitrise Build Cache backend over gRPC.

**Three layers:**
- `cmd/ccache/` — cobra commands (thin CLI wrappers)
- `pkg/ccache/` — public API (importable by external Go packages, e.g. steps)
- `internal/ccache/` — IPC server, protocol, session state

---

## cmd/ccache/ — Commands

### `storage-helper` subcommands

| Command | Flags | What it does |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| `storage-helper start` | `--invocation-id` (default: new UUID) | Starts IPC proxy; blocks until ctx done or idle timeout |

> | `storage-helper stop` | `--socket`, `--invocation-id` | Shuts down the running storage helper process |

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:21:0:f1b013b8
<!-- Misleading documentation in docs/ccache.md line 21: the `--invocation-id` flag for `storage-helper stop` is documented but not actually used by the stop command. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The `--invocation-id` flag for the `stop` command is misleading. The flag is documented in the code as "Parent invocation ID used when reporting analytics", but the `stop` command only calls `Stop()` which does not report analytics or use this parameter. The flag is effectively unused and should either be removed or the documentation should clarify that it's reserved for future use.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 21, Clarify or remove the unused `--invocation-id` flag from the `storage-helper stop` command documentation, or update the flag description to indicate it's not currently used.
```

</details>

}
```

`withDefaults` ordering: sets `Envs` first, then `InvocationID` (generate UUID if empty), then `ParentInvocationID` (env fallback if empty). Order matters — parent fallback reads from `Envs`.

### StorageHelper — lifecycle methods

```go
func NewStorageHelper(params StorageHelperParams) (*StorageHelper, error)
func (h *StorageHelper) Start(ctx context.Context) error
func (h *StorageHelper) Stop(ctx context.Context) error
func (h *StorageHelper) HealthCheck(ctx context.Context, params HealthCheckParams) error
```

`Start` blocks. `Stop` is a no-op if the server is not listening.

### StorageHelper — invocation ID state

`StorageHelper` tracks `invocationID` and `parentID` as live fields (protected by `sync.RWMutex`). Initialized from `StorageHelperParams` at construction. Updated by `SetInvocationID` on success.

```go
func (h *StorageHelper) SetInvocationID(ctx context.Context, parentID, childID string) error
```

Sends IPC request, then updates internal state. State only updated on success.

### StorageHelper — analytics method

```go
func (h *StorageHelper) CollectAndSendStats(ctx context.Context, invocationIDOverride, parentIDOverride string)
```

> Queries the running storage helper for session byte counts via IPC (`0xB2`), parses `ccache --print-stats`, and if there was any activity (cache hits/misses or transfer bytes > 0):

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:84:0:dd7511b8
<!-- Incomplete documentation in docs/ccache.md lines 84-91: CollectAndSendStats behavior when storage helper is not running is not documented. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The documentation for `CollectAndSendStats` is incomplete. It says the method "if there was any activity" will register relation and report stats, but it doesn't mention that the method returns early (no-op) if the storage helper is not running. The documentation should clarify that the method is a no-op if the helper is not listening.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 84, Update the documentation to clarify that CollectAndSendStats is a no-op if the storage helper is not running, and that it always zeros ccache counters regardless of whether analytics are sent.
```

</details>

- `pkg/ccache/` — public API (importable by external Go packages, e.g. steps)
- `internal/ccache/` — IPC server, protocol, session state

---

## cmd/ccache/ — Commands

### `storage-helper` subcommands

| Command | Flags | What it does |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| `storage-helper start` | `--invocation-id` (default: new UUID) | Starts IPC proxy; blocks until ctx done or idle timeout |
| `storage-helper stop` | `--socket` | Shuts down the running storage helper process |
| `storage-helper health-check` | `--socket`, `--timeout` (10s), `--poll-interval` (100ms) | Polls until server ready |
| `storage-helper set-invocation-id` | `--parent-id` (req), `--child-id` (req), `--socket` | Sends parent→child pair to running server via IPC |
| `storage-helper collect-stats` | `--invocation-id`, `--parent-id` | Reports ccache stats to analytics, zeros counters |

---

## Top-level analytics commands

These commands are build-tool-agnostic and registered on the root command (not under `ccache`). Used by Kotlin/Gradle code to register invocation relationships from outside the CLI wrapper.

| Command | Flags | What it does |
|---------|-------|-------------|

> | `register-invocation` | `--invocation-id` (req), `--build-tool` (default: "multiplatform") | Registers invocation with analytics backend |

Reviewer: Why is `multiplatform` a build tool? I thought that's only the name of the service, but we register the actual tool there, `ccache` or `reactnative`

# ccache: Commands, Public API, and Internals

## Overview

ccache integration enables C++ build caching via a local IPC proxy server. The proxy intercepts ccache secondary-storage requests and forwards them to the Bitrise Build Cache backend over gRPC.

**Three layers:**
- `cmd/ccache/` — cobra commands (thin CLI wrappers)
- `pkg/ccache/` — public API (importable by external Go packages, e.g. steps)
- `internal/ccache/` — IPC server, protocol, session state

---

## cmd/ccache/ — Commands

### `storage-helper` subcommands

| Command | Flags | What it does |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| `storage-helper start` | `--invocation-id` (default: new UUID) | Starts IPC proxy; blocks until ctx done or idle timeout |

> | `storage-helper stop` | `--socket` | Shuts down the running storage helper process |

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:21:0:752879c5
<!-- Documentation mismatch in docs/ccache.md at line 21: stop command flags table is incomplete, missing `--invocation-id` flag that exists in the actual implementation. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The documentation lists only `--socket` flag for the stop command, but the actual implementation in cmd/ccache/stop_storage_helper.go line 41 also includes an `--invocation-id` flag. The documentation is incomplete.

🔄 Suggestion:
```suggestion
| `storage-helper stop` | `--socket`, `--invocation-id` | Shuts down the running storage helper process |
```

# ccache: Commands, Public API, and Internals

## Overview

ccache integration enables C++ build caching via a local IPC proxy server. The proxy intercepts ccache secondary-storage requests and forwards them to the Bitrise Build Cache backend over gRPC.

**Three layers:**
- `cmd/ccache/` — cobra commands (thin CLI wrappers)
- `pkg/ccache/` — public API (importable by external Go packages, e.g. steps)
- `internal/ccache/` — IPC server, protocol, session state

---

## cmd/ccache/ — Commands

### `storage-helper` subcommands

| Command | Flags | What it does |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| `storage-helper start` | `--invocation-id` (default: new UUID) | Starts IPC proxy; blocks until ctx done or idle timeout |
| `storage-helper stop` | `--socket`, `--invocation-id` (parent) | Shuts down the running storage helper process |
| `storage-helper health-check` | `--socket`, `--timeout` (10s), `--poll-interval` (100ms) | Polls until server ready |
| `storage-helper set-invocation-id` | `--parent-id` (req), `--child-id` (req), `--socket` | Sends parent→child pair to running server via IPC |

> | `storage-helper collect-stats` | `--invocation-id` (req), `--parent-id`, `--downloaded-bytes`, `--uploaded-bytes` | Reports ccache stats to analytics, zeros counters |

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:24:0:4dce2122
<!-- Inaccurate flags documentation in docs/ccache.md at line 24: collect-stats command flags do not match actual implementation. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The documented flags for collect-stats are inaccurate. The actual implementation (cmd/ccache/collect_stats.go) only has --invocation-id and --parent-id flags (both optional, not required). The flags --downloaded-bytes and --uploaded-bytes do not exist in the actual code.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 24, Update the documentation to match the actual collect-stats command flags: --invocation-id (optional) and --parent-id (optional). Remove the non-existent --downloaded-bytes and --uploaded-bytes flags.
```

</details>

```

Queries the running storage helper for session byte counts via IPC (`0xB2`), parses `ccache --print-stats`, and if there was any activity (cache hits/misses or transfer bytes > 0):
- Registers the parent→child invocation relation
- Reports the ccache invocation to the analytics backend
- Zeros ccache counters (`ccache -z`)

Pass empty strings for both overrides to use the IDs from internal state (set at construction or via `SetInvocationID`). Override params are for callers that know the correct IDs explicitly (e.g. `collect-stats` CLI command with `--invocation-id`/`--parent-id` flags).

If ccache binary is missing, proceeds with empty stats but still reports transfer bytes. All failures are logged as warnings — the method never propagates errors.

### Typical stop-command call sequence

```go
helper, _ := ccachepkg.NewStorageHelper(ccachepkg.StorageHelperParams{
    ParentInvocationID: parentID, // withDefaults fills BITRISE_INVOCATION_ID if empty
})
// helper.invocationID = fresh UUID (queried from running server by CollectAndSendStats)
// helper.parentID     = resolved parent

helper.CollectAndSendStats(ctx, "", "")
helper.Stop(ctx)

> ```

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:87:98:4dce2122
<!-- Documentation mismatch in docs/ccache.md at lines 87-98: documented stop-command call sequence includes CollectAndSendStats, but actual implementation does not. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The documented call sequence shows CollectAndSendStats being called before Stop, but the actual stop command implementation (cmd/ccache/stop_storage_helper.go) only calls Stop() without collecting stats. This is a documentation-to-code mismatch.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md between lines 87 and 98, Either update the documentation to match the actual stop command implementation (which only calls Stop), or update the stop command to call CollectAndSendStats before Stop as documented.
```

</details>

### StorageHelper — analytics method

```go
func (h *StorageHelper) CollectAndSendStats(ctx context.Context, invocationIDOverride, parentIDOverride string)
```

Queries the running storage helper for session byte counts via IPC (`0xB2`), parses `ccache --print-stats`, and if there was any activity (cache hits/misses or transfer bytes > 0):
- Registers the parent→child invocation relation
- Reports the ccache invocation to the analytics backend
- Zeros ccache counters (`ccache -z`)

Pass empty strings for both overrides to use the IDs from internal state (set at construction or via `SetInvocationID`). Override params are for callers that know the correct IDs explicitly (e.g. `collect-stats` CLI command with `--invocation-id`/`--parent-id` flags).

If ccache binary is missing, proceeds with empty stats but still reports transfer bytes. All failures are logged as warnings — the method never propagates errors.

### Typical stop-command call sequence

```go
helper, _ := ccachepkg.NewStorageHelper(ccachepkg.StorageHelperParams{
    ParentInvocationID: parentID, // withDefaults fills BITRISE_INVOCATION_ID if empty
})

> // helper.invocationID = fresh UUID (queried from running server by CollectAndSendStats)

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:99:0:dd7511b8
<!-- Misleading comment in docs/ccache.md at line 99: invocationID is generated locally, not queried from server at construction. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The comment is misleading. The invocationID is generated locally as a fresh UUID in `withDefaults` at construction time, not queried from the server. The server's session info is only queried when `CollectAndSendStats` is called, which may override this value if the server has a different active invocation ID.

🔄 Suggestion:
```suggestion
// helper.invocationID = fresh UUID (generated at construction; may be overridden by server's active invocation ID when CollectAndSendStats is called)
```

> // helper.invocationID = fresh UUID (queried from running server by CollectAndSendStats)

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:99:0:dd7511b8
<!-- Misleading comment in docs/ccache.md line 99: invocationID is generated locally, not queried from the server. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The comment is misleading. The invocationID is not "queried from the running server" - it is generated locally by withDefaults (line 453 of storage_helper.go) when the StorageHelper is created. It may be overridden by the server's session info if CollectAndSendStats is called and the server is running, but it's not initially queried from the server.

🔄 Suggestion:
```suggestion
// helper.invocationID = fresh UUID (generated by withDefaults, may be overridden by server session info)
```

    SocketPath         string            // IPC socket override; empty = read from config file
}
```

`withDefaults` ordering: sets `Envs` first, then `InvocationID` (generate UUID if empty), then `ParentInvocationID` (env fallback if empty). Order matters — parent fallback reads from `Envs`.

### StorageHelper — lifecycle methods

```go
func NewStorageHelper(params StorageHelperParams) (*StorageHelper, error)
func (h *StorageHelper) Start(ctx context.Context) error
func (h *StorageHelper) Stop(ctx context.Context) error
func (h *StorageHelper) HealthCheck(ctx context.Context, params HealthCheckParams) error
```

`Start` blocks. `Stop` is a no-op if the server is not listening.

### StorageHelper — invocation ID state

`StorageHelper` tracks `invocationID` and `parentID` as live fields (protected by `sync.RWMutex`). Initialized from `StorageHelperParams` at construction. Updated by `SetInvocationID` on success.

```go
func (h *StorageHelper) SetInvocationID(ctx context.Context, parentID, childID string) error
```

Sends IPC request, then updates internal state. State only updated on success.

### StorageHelper — analytics methods

> Both methods read IDs from internal state — callers do not pass IDs.

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:74:0:4dce2122
<!-- Documentation mismatch in docs/ccache.md at lines 74-79: documented methods (CollectStats, RegisterInvocationRelation) do not exist in the actual implementation. The real method is CollectAndSendStats. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

Documentation describes separate `CollectStats` and `RegisterInvocationRelation` methods, but the actual implementation has a single `CollectAndSendStats` method that combines both operations. The `registerInvocationRelation` method is also private (lowercase), not public.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 74, Update the documentation to reflect the actual public API: replace the two separate methods with the single `CollectAndSendStats` method that takes invocationIDOverride and parentIDOverride parameters.
```

</details>

```go

> func (h *StorageHelper) CollectStats(ctx context.Context, params CollectStatsParams) error

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:77:0:4dce2122
<!-- Documentation mismatch in docs/ccache.md at lines 77-87: documented method signatures (CollectStats, RegisterInvocationRelation, CollectStatsParams) do not exist in the actual implementation. The real method is CollectAndSendStats. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The documented method signatures do not match the actual implementation. The actual public method is `CollectAndSendStats(ctx context.Context, invocationIDOverride, parentIDOverride string) error`, not `CollectStats`. There is no public `RegisterInvocationRelation()` method (only a private `registerInvocationRelation(ctx context.Context)` method). The `CollectStatsParams` type does not exist in the code.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 77, Update the documentation to reflect the actual public API. Replace the documented method signatures with the real ones: CollectAndSendStats with its actual parameters, and remove the non-existent RegisterInvocationRelation and CollectStatsParams references.
```

</details>

func (h *StorageHelper) RegisterInvocationRelation()
```

`CollectStats` checks if server is listening; if so, overrides `DownloadedBytes`/`UploadedBytes` with live session bytes from IPC before reporting.

```go

> type CollectStatsParams struct {

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:84:0:4dce2122
<!-- Documentation mismatch in docs/ccache.md at lines 84-87: CollectStatsParams type does not exist in the actual code. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The `CollectStatsParams` type does not exist in the actual code. This is a non-existent type documented as part of the public API.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 84, Remove the CollectStatsParams type definition from the documentation as it does not exist in the actual implementation.
```

</details>

    DownloadedBytes int64 // fallback if helper not reachable
    UploadedBytes   int64 // fallback if helper not reachable
}
```

`RegisterInvocationRelation` no-ops if `parentID` is empty.

### Typical stop-command call sequence

```go
helper, _ := ccachepkg.NewStorageHelper(ccachepkg.StorageHelperParams{
    ParentInvocationID: parentID, // withDefaults fills BITRISE_INVOCATION_ID if empty
})
// helper.invocationID = fresh UUID
// helper.parentID     = resolved parent

> helper.CollectStats(ctx, ccachepkg.CollectStatsParams{})

Reviewer: [bitrise-plugin-ai-reviewer]: docs/ccache.md:101:0:4dce2122
<!-- Documentation mismatch in docs/ccache.md at lines 101-103: example code uses non-existent methods (CollectStats, RegisterInvocationRelation) instead of the actual CollectAndSendStats method. -->
[//]: # ([skip ci])

**🐛 Bug**

The documented call sequence uses non-existent methods. The actual method is `CollectAndSendStats(ctx, "", "")` which combines stats collection, sending, and relation registration. There is no separate `RegisterInvocationRelation()` public method.

<details>
<summary>🤖 Prompt for AI Agents:</summary>

```
In docs/ccache.md at line 101, Update the example code to use the actual public API: CollectAndSendStats instead of CollectStats, and remove the RegisterInvocationRelation call since it's handled internally by CollectAndSendStats.
```

</details>
